[TONE]
MARTHA: But we really
got used to it.
We had no choice.
INTERVIEWER 1: And
they were what--
were-- they were sent in
what way, packages or what?
MARTHA: No.
They were flying over there, and
we had to pack it in basket--
big baskets.
INTERVIEWER 1: Yes.
MARTHA: And these
baskets were shipped to--
to Germany.
The last one was shipped
to Theresienstadt.
And when-- when the Red
Cross came to Theresienstadt,
we were ordered to put
down the windows, curtains.
We had to clean up everything.
And, uh, they gave us,
from this last transport,
these things what they had--
sheets and so to
cover the mattresses.
And we had to make it--
everything-- as nice
as it was possible.
We had to go on our
knees to clean the floor.
And when the Red
Cross was leaving,
so we had to write cards.
They wake us up at 3:00
in the morning always
to write home that we
got from the Red Cross
sardines and sugar and jam.
And once, they-- they waked us
up to write the cards that we
were--
were then-- we
were by a concert.
It's always 3:00 in the
mornings, they waked us up.
INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember
the Red Cross people coming?
Were you close,
physically, to one of them?
Could you speak to them?
MARTHA: No.
No.
INTERVIEWER 1: What did you see?
How did they--
MARTHA: On the end-- on the
end only, when the Swedish Red
Cross was coming to
pick up the Danish Jews.
The king of Denmark
ordered the--
because Sweden was neutral,
so all these officers
with big buses came
for the Danish Jews.
And the Danish Jews were
protected from the king.
They got packages and, from
the Red Cross, always food.
And I saw it the last, when the
German there on the end, they--
they're-- they're Sweden.
So that was the only
things that I saw,
the Sweden Red Cross, never
from Switzerland-- never.
And we were not
allowed to go, even
when there was a bombardment
from the American and we there.
We ran out from the barrack.
The Scharführer was yelling, you
are happy that our friends are
coming.
And he-- he--
he ordered us in.
We couldn't stay outside.
We saw the fire because
it was not too far from us
where the bombs were falling.
INTERVIEWER 2: Could-- could
you hear from your family?
Did you know what was
happening to your children
and your husband?
MARTHA: Yes, I got, uh,
sent, once they allowed
the-- the people--
the mixed people, who get once
a month a card from the family.
Well, I could write
once a month a card
but it had to be 30 words.
If it was one word more,
they break the card
and throw it away.
INTERVIEWER 1: Can
you read the card?
MARTHA: It is [INAUDIBLE].
INTERVIEWER 1: Read it.
MARTHA: "My dear
Noemi. it's in German.
We were ordered, all,
to write in German.
"Why do-- why do
not write to me?
Please write me if you
are in good health.
I am so worrying for all of you.
Is-- is, uh, Father
writing to you?
And do you hear from--
from your sister?
Did you send a package?
Did you get a package?
Please don't forget me."
This was a card from my
daughter she sent to my husband.
It was on the end.
It was already censored.
She say-- she wrote, "Dear
Papa, many thanks for your card.
I was by the dentist.
We both, my sister and I,
we both are in good health.
I sent you a package,
what you asked me for.
Kisses, Noemi.
Then I-- then, she
wrote him a card.
This is a card where
it's always censored.
This-- she sent him a card
where she wrote what--
what we all sent him.
But the package came back.
And it was no more
allowed to send packages.
So he didn't get
what he asked for.
It was in the third
camp where he was.
INTERVIEWER 2: Can you--
INTERVIEWER 1:
Can you show the--
the card?
The stamp is Hitler's
picture, isn't it?
MARTHA: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: Can you
show it to the camera?
Right.
This is a correspondence from
your girl to you or from you
to your daughter?
MARTHA: This from my husband.
It comes from, it
was a Sonderlager.
A special la-- camp
for this Jewish man--
this Christian man.
INTERVIEWER 2: Can
you tell us a little
about the conditions at
Theresienstadt where you lived?
And were you segregated?
Were certain kinds of
people kept together,
separated in Theresienstadt?
MARTHA: We were
always in barracks.
I cannot remember how
many barracks there were.
But we had to go to
work and then the--
when we didn't have the
Glimmer work, this, uh--
INTERVIEWER 2: Mica.
MARTHA: Mica.
We-- we were-- we got
a bucket and a broom,
and we marched, a thousand
woman in Theresienstadt,
to clean the town.
The hospital there, the old,
sick people, were lying,
and everything had to be washed.
And on our knees, we
had to wash it and to--
to roam the streets and
like this, when we had no--
no stones to cut this mica.
[INAUDIBLE] handkerchief.
Thank you.
I have here.
INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, how, uh, um,
did you have your own mattress?
Did you have your--
MARTHA: No, no.
We had no mattresses there.
And we had to--
INTERVIEWER 1: [INAUDIBLE].
MARTHA: We had to clean,
every day, our place before we
went to work.
We had to wash the small
place where we go to the bath.
INTERVIEWER 2: I mean,
did you have, uh,
your own bunk to
yourself, or did you
have to share bunks
with other people?
A bunk bed-- did you
have your own bunk bed?
MARTHA: Bed?
INTERVIEWER 2: Yes.
One to--
MARTHA: Yes, yes, yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: One to a--
one.
One person to a bunk.
MARTHA: Yes.
We were-- we were four
in a little space.
INTERVIEWER 2: Four
MARTHA: Four in a
little space, yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: What happened
to some of the women there?
What-- what, uh--
MARTHA: One after about me,
she got, um, at the end,
she got typhus.
Because when the
transport came back--
when the transport came back,
so she ran to-- to the gate
where these people from
Auschwitz were interned.
And she saw her sister.
And she kissed her
through the gate.
And she infected
herself with typhus.
We were all-- we--
we all had, uh, injection--
typhus injection.
Because they were
afraid that we--
that we have an epidemy
in Theresienstadt,
and we couldn't work
on these stones.
INTERVIEWER 1:
Vaccines, you mean?
MARTHA: Yes.
And, uh, it was a
bad experience, too.
We were-- we all got
diarrhea from it.
And once we were--
the only when we got meat,
it was from a sick horse.
And we got this meat,
as, cooked this goulash,
and we were all sick.
We were, the whole night,
sitting on the latrine,
one next, to the other,
woman, man, everything.
INTERVIEWER 2: All together.
MARTHA: All together.
It was-- it was not
enough latrines.
One took the other
away to get this--
INTERVIEWER 2: Pushed
the other person away?
MARTHA: Yes.
It was a terrible night
from this poisoned meat.
And, uh, this, uh-- this
Austrian Scharführer what gave
us this-- what allowed
to give us this meat,
he was punished and
taken away from the camp.
INTERVIEWER 2: Were
there some other ways
that you were kept busy in camp
when there was no mica to cut?
MARTHA: Only to clean--
to clean, to wash, or to clean
the hospital, the floors,
and whatever was to-- to do.
INTERVIEWER 2: You were
also given buckets of water
for some other
purpose, I believe?
MARTHA: Uh, yes.
When we-- when we want to wash
us, we had to go for water.
INTERVIEWER 2: Uh, what--
was there something about--
MARTHA: We had the shower.
We were allowed,
sometimes, to shower.
We had to pay two
korunas for it.
We got Ghettogeld-- money--
ghetto money.
And I-- I gave this ghetto
money to my daughter last year.
INTERVIEWER 2: Was there
something about fires?
MARTHA: Yes.
We had-- we had a fire
in Theresienstadt.
And-- and-- a woman said
to the Scharführer--
no, he put-- he put us in the--
in the barracks, burning paper.
And he said, you need some job.
So now, you can, uh--
you can, uh, be the firefighter.
And a woman said to
him, we should local--
localize the fire
from this side.
And he took her bucket with
water and put it over her head.
So--
INTERVIEWER 1: He
made you set the fire?
MARTHA: Yes.
He--
INTERVIEWER 1: Told
to set the fire.
MARTHA: He set the
fire to make us work.
And, uh, she allowed herself
to tell him something.
It was a German Gestapo.
His name was, I think,
Hahn, if I remember well.
And so she was punished in the
wintertime with the cold water
on her head.
INTERVIEWER 1: Did
people go crazy there?
MARTHA: Yes.
Many people.
INTERVIEWER 1: Do you remember--
MARTHA: Yes, there were--
INTERVIEWER 1: What do--
what do you remember?
MARTHA: There were one
building where the-- the--
when you passed by, they were
yelling, yelling, crying.
It was terrible to pass by.
And in my transport, it
was a 17-year-old girl
what got crazy.
Her mother was a Christian.
She was left behind.
And her father was already dead.
And she-- she was Jewish.
And she was-- she
got crazy there.
She was in my
transport because--
INTERVIEWER 1: What happened?
MARTHA: --she were mixed.
I never saw her again.
Maybe was in this house
where all these crazy people
were yelling.
INTERVIEWER 2: What happened
then in Theresienstadt?
What happened as the war
was coming to an end?
MARTHA: Some-- it were some--
some, uh, things.
I saw once, the Gestapo put
the fist through a man's mouth
because he said something.
And his teeth flow out.
One men was with a
little knife picked.
He was full of scars here.
So some things like this.
But they-- that were Jews
what were left from the other
transport, not from--
from our.
But there were also Jews from
but has Christian woman--
women.
And many were divorced, too,
when they were in the camp.
The woman divorced them.
INTERVIEWER 1: Divorced the men.
MARTHA: Yes.
And the men was--
were shipped away.
INTERVIEWER 1: To [INAUDIBLE].
MARTHA: To Auschwitz, yes.
The same like the women--
the same thing.
INTERVIEWER 1: You mentioned
before that you could only
write 31 words.
MARTHA: 30 words.
INTERVIEWER 1: 30.
Are these-- is this a postcard--
MARTHA: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: --with
a number on each?
MARTHA: Yes, that I wrote.
INTERVIEWER 1: And you
put a number on each word.
MARTHA: Yes.
Because if it was one word more,
they break it and it never--
INTERVIEWER 1: So you cross
out the 31st word here.
You see this?
"Deine"-- you cross it out.
MARTHA: Yes.
Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: So it
should be only 30 words.
MARTHA: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: The last sentence
is "bitte vergiss mich nicht"--
don't forget me.
MARTHA: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 1: And you couldn't
say, "deine"-- your mother.
You have to say just "Mutti."
MARTHA: Yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: Uh,
what happened, uh,
later on, as the
Americans started to bomb
and as the war was
coming to a close?
What happened to you?
MARTHA: I-- I had the--
I met a man--
man what was in the
Sudeten, our neighbor.
And he had a Christian wife.
And uh, when the quarantine
was over Theresienstadt because
of these infected
people from Auschwitz,
he said to me, if
I have the courage,
to go at night with him
over the wall and walk home.
It-- and I said,
I would like to.
Because some people left, and
were taken by the troopers
back in the camp.
And I was afraid
because of the typhus
that we had the long quarantine.
And so-- and he, too.
He had two sons in-- in--
in one camp.
He didn't know where.
And so we-- we went one
night when all was quiet.
It was not quiet
because the shooting was
from Czech and Germans outside.
We could hear it.
But, uh, he said to me, I
help you over my shoulders,
and you jump down.
And I did.
And he came after me.
But we had to crawl
on hand and feet
because that they were
shooting the German
with-- the last German with
the Czech were shooting.
And they-- on this side,
where they're shooting,
there were no troopers.
So we-- we were not seen.
It took about an hour to this--
to the next town.
And these men had, from--
from a business fam--
family there that he
knew, and they let
us slept over and gave us food.
And the next day, we
walked away again.
And uh, some trucks took us--
French trucks and
one Czech truck--
took us further home.
There were no trains.
It was all bombed.
INTERVIEWER 1: You
had crossed the lines
into the Allied territory?
There were French
soldiers already?
MARTHA: No.
The French were with-- with the
Czechs, not with the German--
INTERVIEWER 1: Yes.
MARTHA: --at this time.
They saved themselves
from the German.
So they took us.
I-- we both-- we spo--
could speak French.
So we communicated with them.
And when they had
to go another way,
they let us out from the
truck, and we walked again
until we find another truck what
took us a little bit further.
And then, when we
came nearer to--
to our hometowns, there
were already train.
So we took the train.
He-- he had another way,
and I had another way.
So, we, after two days,
we were finally home.
I find my husband very sick
and my children, thanks God,
I find them all.
But, uh, my-- my smaller
daughter didn't recognize me.
INTERVIEWER 1: What did she do?
MARTHA: What?
INTERVIEWER 1: What did
she do when you came?
What did the child do--
do when you came?
MARTHA: The elder
one was very happy.
INTERVIEWER 1: No, the
child-- the younger one.
MARTHA: The-- the younger
didn't recognize me.
And my husband was very sick.
We didn't-- he--
we were thinking he has typhus
because he has so high fever.
But he got some antibiotics.
And he was, then, OK.
But he never
recovered, uh, for--
his mind never recovered
from this ordeal.
He was not, when we were--
in 1947, when we--
when we went to South
America, he was very unhappy.
He never could
attach to a new life.
INTERVIEWER 2: When
you came back home,
your youngest child was
still with the other family?
MARTHA: No.
They give her to me back.
She was till the end, yes.
And the-- the older was
by, in the pastor's house.
INTERVIEWER 2: So
when you came back--
MARTHA: They gave
her back to me, yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: You went
to collect your children?
MARTHA: Yes.
I-- we had--
our apartment had,
uh, a Czech physician.
And when we came
back, he moved out.
He gave us our--
apartment back.
But it was-- most was robbed.
We had a few furniture inside.
But all the other
thing were taken away.
INTERVIEWER 2: So when you
went to collect your younger
daughter at this family's,
what was your reaction when
you came there?
MARTHA: I was not in
good shape, either.
I was limping from
this humidity.
I-- I had, uh, sciatica.
I was in very much
pain and was limping.
But they give me some electric--
electric bus.
And I couldn't stand it.
My nerves couldn't take this.
INTERVIEWER 2: Hm-mm.
Hm-mm.
MARTHA: And there-- maybe
I've forget something to tell.
INTERVIEWER 2: What happened to
that man who you escaped with?
MARTHA: Yeah, he
went from one camp
to the other looking
for his children.
And when he was told--
the children were about 10 and
12 years old and were Jewish.
The mother was Christian,
and the children were Jewish.
Because he was from a--
not Orthodox but a
believing family--
and, uh, when he hear that
the children were killed,
so he shot himself.
They had the word-- the
German had the word--
killed when flying--
when they fled.
They were killed.
But it was not true.
They always said, um--
INTERVIEWER 1: Trying to escape.
MARTHA: Yes.
They always said,
uh, erschossen--
auf der Flucht erschossen.
You understand?
So it--
INTERVIEWER 1: Shot
while trying to escape.
MARTHA: Yes.
But he couldn't get over.
And, uh, he wrote me.
And his last letter,
what he wrote me, uh,
said I should not answer him.
He will not be alive anymore.
And then his wife sent me a
card, said he shot himself.
That was the end for--
for many from these people
what couldn't get over
not to find their
children anymore.
This-- this woman
what had typhus
what was sleeping
on top of me, she
was so happy to see her
three-year-old child
and husband, and she died in the
quarantine with infected typhus
from her sister because
she kissed her sister.
There were so many
tragedies on the end,
where they could be free.
They had to die, anyway.
INTERVIEWER 2: You
going to end there?
Um, do you want to--
that's it?
Do you want to end up now?
INTERVIEWER 1: I think, yes.
INTERVIEWER 2: OK.
Thank you very, very much--
MARTHA: You're welcome.
INTERVIEWER 1: --Martha.
MARTHA: I have so many cards.
I take only some of them.
INTERVIEWER 1: Is
your husband alive?
MARTHA: My husband?
No.
He died four years after
when we went Argentina.
He-- he went every Sunday to
the port with us and said,
I have to see the ship
that brought me here.
He said-- said the--
das verfluchte Schiff.
INTERVIEWER 1: The cursed ship.
MARTHA: The cursed ship
that brought me over here.
He couldn't get over.
He died four years
later on cancer.
INTERVIEWER 1: Of cancer.
MARTHA: So I am 33 years
widow with two children.
And I had not much restitution
because I had not many papers.
I-- my parents, my husband,
paid a big insurance in Germany.
They had, in every
country, um, offices.
And they paid the insurance
in US dollars what--
what was very expensive
for Czech koruns.
And I got nothing
for it-- nothing.
And they confirmed it, that
it's true, that I should get it.
But I got nothing--
nothing.
I-- I had the help
from my parents in--
in the Sudeten.
It's now Czechoslovakia.
Now, the-- the Czech has
the-- the help, but I--
but I have nothing.
And even the, um, government
here, gave from the gold
what our president
left here that he took.
When he left Czechoslovakia,
President Benes
took gold with him.
And this was given to
Czech people that lost
their houses in Czechoslovakia.
But they had to be in
1948 and 1949 and citiz--
American citizens.
And I wasn't.
I was in-- in Argentina in '48.
I came there in '47.
And I came to America
[? '63. ?] So my claim was not--
not, uh, allowed.
They-- they wanted to give me a
hearing, but the lawyer told me
I had not to spend a penny for
it because it wouldn't help.
It was only for the people that
were here, American citizens,
till '49.
So I fell, always,
on the dry side,
never on the buttered side.
And it was very hard in
Argentina for my children
and for myself.
And my husband, uh, was really--
my children had not a youth
because even my younger
daughter was eight a
half years old when
we came to Argen-- five years
old when we came to Argentina.
She was eight a half years
old when my husband died.
And the older one was 15 a half.
So they had not youth.
They both had to
work from 14 years.
And, uh, I--
I worked 16 hours a day
because I had to make a living.
INTERVIEWER 1: While in
Argentina, did you meet
or get-- come in contact with
Germans, with Nazis there?
MARTHA: No.
I had, um, a cousin,
rabbi, in-- in-- in London.
And he got to me through the
international committee--
intergovernmen--
intergovernmental committee
the free trip and this ship--
INTERVIEWER 1: I
understand that.
But I was asking, while you
were living in Argentina,
and while you were living in
Argentina for so many years,
whether you spotted, whether
you knew that there were also
Nazis in Argentina?
MARTHA: Yes, yes-- many, many.
INTERVIEWER 1: Did
you meet any of them?
Did you--
MARTHA: No.
They were Argentina Nazis, no?
In front of where I
lived was a dentist.
His son was a very big Nazi.
But the-- the German
Nazi, I never met there.
But around-- around the
town in the boroughs,
there were German.
And, uh, one case was
there were small synagogues
with, uh, little gardens.
And a child from--
from a rabbi was--
was bicycle around the--
the synagogue, and
a German shoot him.
From this, I knew,
and I knew from--
from the-- the--
this, uh, DAIA, it--
it was a Jewish
organization, so they had a--
a home for children
what has no parents--
Jewish children.
And they, these Nazis, a
couple of them at night,
break in and cut this--
the children in their faces
with the razor blades.
It's true.
It's not a story.
It's really true.
INTERVIEWER 1: And
that happened--
MARTHA: And that
happens in Argentina.
Always in-- that in
Argentina, come nothing out
in the big letters
in the newspapers.
So in France only,
in the Jewish paper.
But uh, all over,
uh, anti-Semites--
all over, wherever you go.
We should go to Chile, but
we didn't get the money.
So we-- we had to
stay in Argentina.
My husband didn't want this.
He said, because on-- on
the custom, when we came in,
they already said,
these are all Jews.
So my husband said, in such a
country, I don't want to live.
He was unhappy there.
INTERVIEWER 1: Thank you.
MARTHA: You are very welcome.